I remember the day as if it were yesterday. During my second year in college, I was attempting to transmit a group of characters comprising my name from one computer to another. I connected the computers using RS-232 cable, wrote the necessary programs and executed them. I typed my name on one terminal and rushed to the other to see the results. "Wow, this is magic!" I exclaimed as I read 'Tom' on the screen. While I realized intuitively that a complex version of this elementary network could achieve much, at the time I had no real idea what. Now, four years later, I know that Networking makes possible a plethora of applications, from video-conferencing over the Internet to linking banks through private networks. It still seems like magic. Or rather, a grand adventure - one that I most certainly want to be part of.
My interest in applied science dates back to my school days. During high school, I was fascinated with electronic gadgets. Soon thereafter, designing and building basic circuits started as a hobby. Along the way, however, I realized that the problem-solving aspect of making electronic gadgets was what I enjoyed the most. Engineering was a natural career choice after this.
During my undergraduate studies at the Electronics & Communication department of M.K. College of Engineering, subjects like Microprocessors, C-Programming, Computer Networks interested me the most. I was awestruck by the potential of Intel 8086 microprocessor, more so by the manner in which its faster and more powerful cousins revolutionized the working of computers in a decade. I was now determined to focus on microprocessors during my Final Year project.

I elected to do the project at National Space Research Organization (NSRO) as it has an outstanding infrastructure setup and a stimulating, world-class research environment. This enabled me to work with some of the best minds dedicated to engineering research in my country. I gained a lot from this association - in particular, an idea of how rewarding and meaningful a career in research could be. The more tangible benefits have been a deeper insight into architecture and working of microprocessors and thorough C-programming skills. Sometimes I spent more than ten hours a day at NSRO, reading manuals and troubleshooting circuits and debugging code. I am glad to say the effort paid off in the end. Mr. Tendulkar, my project guide, deemed the results of my project to be most valuable. The interface card that I designed was later added to NSRO's Spacecraft Interface Simulator (SIS) systems. This project was the highlight of my academic career. Most importantly, I left NSRO with the decision to study advanced computing.
During my first job at Neville Engineering and Locomotive Co. (NELCO), I developed a real-time monitoring system for the Molding Line in Foundry. Success on this project gave me the confidence to provide software solutions to real-life problems. Although I liked the job, software development at NELCO was a support function. I therefore switched to Mohinder Belgian Telecom Ltd. (MBT), a multinational company providing software solutions in wide-ranging fields, telecommunications being its forte. At MBT, I have been involved with Project ART, Belgian Telecom's new front-end system providing intelligent access to its Customer Service System (CSS). Working on this project has helped me hone my programming skills on real-life problems. I developed an appreciation of 'the big picture', and conversely how important details are. I also discovered leadership skills in myself, and frequently assisted colleagues who had little or no background in computers. As an outcome of this, the company asked me to take occasional seminars on Operating Systems and C-Programming for my colleagues. I have been appointed Team Leader within a year and today, I independently look after enhancements and maintenance of three modules out of the sixteen in Project ART.
During my work on project ART at MBT and through my interaction with colleagues, I have grown to admire the role of Computer Networks in empowering end-users. I am not directly involved with Computer Networks in my job, but through avid reading of periodicals and journals like 'Network World', I have sustained my interest in the field. In fact, after reading about the immense potential of path-breaking protocols such as 'Multicast' and applications like 'Voice Over IP' and 'Virtual Private Networks', I cannot help but feel excited about the potential for new research in this area.

While my present job has helped me develop a thorough insight into project handling, the industry environment that I am currently in cannot support my desire for research. I possess industry-hardened skills in Computers, but I must build on these to achieve my goal of undertaking cutting-edge research in advanced computing, with specific reference to Computer Networks. I therefore believe that I must return to the academic world for further growth.
I wish to earn an MS degree in Computer Science. I intend to follow this up with a Ph.D., and later, a career in research and teaching. I have spoken to my professors, seniors and colleagues about my choice of University, and have applied to Princeton University because it is reputable for its research facilities and computing resources. The department web site revealed a very strong faculty involved in extensive research in the area of Computer Networks. This has strengthened my resolve to study at Princeton University.
I bring along a strong grasp of fundamentals in Electronics and Computers, an aptitude for teaching and team work, a zest for challenges and an enthusiastic desire to learn all I can. I would like to take with me, in addition to knowledge of Computer Networks, a network of strong and lasting relationships with my teachers and fellow-students. I hope that my background and qualifications are found suitable for an MS in Computer Science at Princeton University.

I decided to attend the University of California at Santa Barbara(UCSB) as a Math - Computer Science (CS) major with the intention of working in the information technology industry one day. During my first year of college, I heard about courses offered in Human Computer Interaction (HCI). Further conversations with a student specializing in HCI enlightened me on its applications in the everyday world. I realized that knowledge of the cognitive aspects of organization and representation of information with a strong CS background could help me create efficient information architectures and effective user interactive designs. I could even draw upon my course work and experiences in extracurricular activities in so far as they relate to human interaction with technology to help overcome communication barriers. For example, a drama performance with its power of presentation, the silent display of paintings and the world of the blind and handicapped all present subtle insights to effective communication. Hence, along with my major field of study, I pursued cognitive science to achieve my goal of being able to work with people and computers simultaneously.
Throughout my undergraduate career, I have engaged myself in activities that merge the components of art, human behavior and technology to enable better learning methods amongst youth and I want to continue to do so at a professional level. Graduate studies in HCI will enable me to develop the skills to create software designs that I can subsequently apply in an academic environment to promote e-learning techniques. Since I lived in India for ten years and am aware of the large number of disadvantaged, poor and handicapped people, I would eventually like to implement such methods in the underserved segments of an Indian society. I am attracted by the vast research facilities at UG that can be a major resource in developing effective interactive computer interfaces. Research projects on learning technologies like the Center for Highly Interactive Computing in Education (Hi-Ce) is of particular interest to me since it deals with the academic development in youth by blending the social sciences with technical components.
In order to broaden my understanding of the role of cognition in everyday computer applications, I have taken several courses at UCSB in the specific area of cognitive science. My coursework has also investigated the cognitive basis of successful multimedia designs while looking at its impact on the efficiency and effectiveness of information systems. In addition to these challenging courses, I have gained extensive knowledge about interactive designs and computer mediated communication through computer science courses, research projects, industrial experience and organizational involvement.

I have always liked teaching, and as I explored HCI related projects, I got an opportunity to work with a distance education program at UCSB. We used interactive mathematics software to tutor students from underserved communities via the internet. Communication problems amongst the tutors grew when the team of five expanded fivefold in the next year. To resolve the issue, I initiated a file based information management system in which the tutors entered detailed reports of tutoring sessions they conducted with the students. This system eliminated any unnecessary repetition of material by another tutor during a follow-up session, thus improving the efficiency of the program. This experience was very exhilarating as it involved working in a team that succeeded in starting a new project to contribute to the needs of the society. I gained an extensive insight into how students from similar backgrounds respond differently to the same information presented to them. Having interacted with these children for almost two years, I learned more about their family environment and the hardships they undergo at home. I realized that due to the lack of encouragement from their family, disinterest in school and education, we were their only source of motivation to excel academically. Thus, we constantly reminded them of the importance of higher education and reassured them that just like us, they are also capable of obtaining a college degree. The fascination of learning through computers as opposed to classroom teaching and being able to learn at their own pace also inspired the students to make an effort to achieve better scores. 80% of the students tutored within those two years graduated from elementary algebra and were placed in advanced level math classes the following year.
During my second year at UCSB, I joined Worldguide, WashSpace at the XYZ Institute of Oceanography as a summer intern. I worked with the Worldguide team in creating internet-based courses on Earth and Environmental science for K-12 students. I had the URL for Worldguide added as a useful link to the official websites of 27 state boards of K-12 education across the US as well as an Australian board of education. The most difficult part of this project was organizing all the information we had gathered in a clear and concise way to enhance learning. I found it particularly challenging to design an attractive layout of the material that would appeal to K-12 children. However, as a team we were able to coordinate our efforts and achieve our goal.
Currently I am developing an e-learning course on Web Programming Languages with a team of five students from the Cognitive Science department at UCSB. I have succeeded in filtering all the available information on learning JavaScript and rewriting it into five hours worth of lecture material. This task required evaluating and summarizing several books and online resources while ensuring all necessary and sufficient information to teach JavaScript was included. My next challenge was to create interactive exercises based on the course content to promote active learning. I have incorporated popular themes like the TV sitcom Friends and Starbucks coffee into the lecture material and exercises. For example, after discussing data types and concatenation of variables in the lecture, I introduce an interactive exercise that ties both of the themes together. I ask the students to help Rachel make a vanilla latte for Joey by looking at a Starbucks menu and displaying the ingredients as a concatenation of string variables. I believe this is a good way to hold the students attention and interest since these are things they enjoy and can relate to. Through this experience, I have gained a better understanding of the cognitive aspects of user-centered design.
While I lived in India, I was an active member of the Red Cross Committee. Through this organization, I spent a year with the poor people in slums, playing with the children and helping out in the one-room school. Additionally, I had the opportunity of reading to students at the school for blind children for three years. While these activities were both educational and enjoyable, they also provided me with a unique experience in the basics of communication against the backdrop of emotional and physical handicap.
Additionally, I have been able to explore a variety of marketing techniques as well as learn more about digital aesthetics through the UCSB Advertising club. Thus, I have had wonderful opportunities to combine my interests in working with people, computers and art. Although I have learned a lot from these experiences, I feel that with further training in HCI I could improve my performance in developing effective user interface designs and information architectures. I am convinced that the HCI program and research opportunities involving education and youth at SI will help me succeed in pursuing my ambition of advancing computer mediated education in an underserved community. I have had plenty of experience in creating and developing interactive e-learning courses for underprivileged students in particular, that I could share with research projects that address educational problems faced in rural environments. Thus, the combination of my interest in working with people and technology to help the academic development in youth from underserved communities along with my background makes me an ideal candidate for any such research opportunities with the SI department at UG.
